>> The childhood amalgam
trial, which was a prospective
randomized study, which is
the top level study you can do
in science--
it means taking a whole
group of children,
dividing them
randomly, some of whom
you get amalgams, some of
whom you get composites.
Furthermore, they
said, we're going
to test on series of
parameters-- urinary
mercury, porphyrins, kidney
damage, neurological damage.
They decided all
that before they ever
tested a single child.
This is what we're going to do.
They collected all the
data prospectively.
And what it reveals is damage
in every single domain study.
Every single outcome
that they were
looking at that they said, this
might be of concern, so we want
to study it to see if it's
related to amalgam, all of them
are being linked to
amalgam exposure.
What happens to these children
in the course of the study?
And what we found, looking
at first, urinary mercury,
then urinary porphyrins, then
eventually kidney dysfunction
markers, is that
mercury exposure
from dental amalgams in
a dose-dependent fashion,
meaning the amount of
mercury being released
from the amalgams
significantly negatively impact
each of those measurements.
So it turns out that amalgams,
based on the number, the size,
how many you have,
all of those things,
is related to how much
urinary mercury you have.
It's related to
how much porphyrins
you have for the
mercury-associated porphyrins.
And perhaps worse,
it's associated
with kidney dysfunction.
It actually seems to be
causing ongoing kidney
damage at the level of
the proximal tubules.
When one studies
kidney dysfunction,
chronic damage to
the proximal tubules
is associated with chronic
kidney disease, which
is the number one kind of kidney
disease in the United States.
In considering the childhood
amalgam trial findings
that I've been
discussing, they're
telling a very compelling
story, a story of damage
to the kidney, of mercury
building up in the body,
of causing kidney
damage, brain damage.
This is a story
that makes sense--
very direct.
Very simple to understand.
If I had somebody from the
American Dental Association
sitting next to me and
trying to tell their story,
what would they say now?
Well, amalgams are safe.
They always say that.
Well, how do you explain that
in light of these findings?
Well, we have to suspend the
laws of chemistry and physics
and physiology to
say, yeah, it's just
happenstance, coincidence, that
we found damage to the kidney.
It's really safe.
Well, it contributed
to mercury body burden.
That's coincidence.
They're actually safe.
Well, we can find
it in the urine.
It's just happenstance,
coincidence.
It must be safe.
There is no story.
The story that
we're telling is one
that's based on over 100 years
of science about mercury.
We know that mercury is
released from amalgams.
We know mercury is toxic
to almost every organ
system in the body.
This is what was plausible
before the study.
Now, it's overwhelmingly
plausible.
They have no story
to tell other than,
we think it's safe because
we think it's safe.
And if you need me to say
it again, I think it's safe,
is what they would say.